1
Analysis of DNS Dependencies and their Security
Implications in Australia: A Comparative Study of
General and Indigenous Populations
Niousha Nazemi , Member, IEEE, Omid Tavallaie , Anna Maria Mandalari ,
Hamed Haddadi , Member, IEEE, Ralph Holz , and Albert Y. Zomaya , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper investigates the impact of internet centralization on DNS provisioning, particularly its effects on vulnerable populations such as the indigenous people of Australia. We
analyze the DNS dependencies of Australian government domains
that serve indigenous communities compared to those serving
the general population. Our study categorizes DNS providers
into leading (hyperscaler, US-headquartered companies), nonleading (smaller Australian-headquartered or non-Australian
companies), and Australian government-hosted providers. Then,
we build dependency graphs to demonstrate the direct dependency between Australian government domains and their DNS
providers and the indirect dependency involving further layers
of providers. Additionally, we conduct an IP location analysis of
DNS providers to map out the geographical distribution of DNS
servers, revealing the extent of centralization on DNS services
within or outside of Australia. Finally, we introduce an attacker
model to categorize potential cyber attackers based on their
intentions and resources. By considering attacker models and
DNS dependency results, we discuss the security vulnerability of
each population group against any group of attackers and analyze
whether the current setup of the DNS services of Australian
government services contributes to a digital divide.
Index Terms—DNS dependency, Internet centralization, IP
Geolocation, Indigenous Australians.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE concept of Internet centralization [1] refers to consolidating control over the Internet’s infrastructure and
services. The Domain Name System (DNS) is a core Internet
service. In the context of the DNS, centralization refers to
the control that is held by a limited number of dominant
companies [2] such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) Route 53
[3], Microsoft Azure [4], Cloudflare DNS [5], Google Cloud
DNS [6], and Akamai Edge DNS [7]. This centralization leads
to secondary effects on Internet services and infrastructure,
such as the availability of the daily services used by a large
population of Internet users [8].
In this regard, the significance of authoritative name servers
becomes apparent in the context of service dependencies. The
latter term refers to a situation where a service’s functionality
or effectiveness relies on another’s correct functioning. Hence,
the efficiency and accuracy of the DNS resolution process
are highly dependent on the performance and security of the
authoritative name servers. A single point of failure is a major
risk in such a system. For example, if an authoritative name
server in a centralized setting fails, it can disrupt access to
many websites and online services despite redundancies. This
aboriginalaffairs.nsw.gov.au.
FQDN
ccTLD
gTLD
2nd Level
Domain
3rd Level
Domain
Root
Fig. 1: FQDN.
Client
aboriginalaffairs.nsw.gov.au
1
4
8 5
2
3
6
Root Server
TLD Server
Authoritative Nameserver
119.148.70.243 Local DNS Resolver
7
Fig. 2: DNS resolution process.
is not impossible, and scenarios with cascading failures due to
centralization have been observed in the recent past [9], [10].
In this paper, we ask how failures due to DNS centralization
can impact different population groups. We choose the Australian setting as our focus area for two reasons: first, Australia
has a sizable vulnerable population, namely the indigenous
community. Second, Australia has a highly developed digital
infrastructure, and many government services are available
online. We analyze the DNS dependencies of Australian government domains that serve Indigenous communities compared
to those serving the general population. Our study makes three
main contributions:
• Digital Divide: We examine whether there is a difference in
the DNS service providers used for indigenous and general
population domains. Our purpose is to understand whether
such variations contribute to a possible digital divide between the general population and indigenous peoples.
• Geographical Dependencies: We analyze the geographical
distribution of DNS servers linked to Australian governmental domains. We focus particularly on servers operated by
hyperscaler companies and aim to determine these servers’
physical locations, distinguishing those within Australia
from those abroad.
• Security Problems: By considering the DNS dependency
results and the provider IP networks, we discuss the vulnerability of each domain group to different types of attacker
models. We categorize potential attackers into representative
groups of varying strengths and analyze their potential
impact on different domain groups.
Our methodology consists of four main phases: Australian
government service identification, data collection, retrieving
authoritative name servers, and constructing DNS dependency
graphs. We categorize DNS providers into leading (hyperarXiv:2408.12958v1 [cs.NI] 23 Aug 2024
2
scaler, US-headquartered companies), non-leading (smaller
Australian-headquartered or non-Australian companies), and
Australian government-hosted providers. This paper is an
extended version of our previous work [11] presented at the
Workshop on Transparency, Accountability, and User Control
for a Responsible Internet (TAURIN) in 2023 [12], where
focused exclusively on the digital divide, we now broaden our
scope significantly to include security analyses and analysis
of geographic dependencies.
The paper is structured as follows: We begin with background information on DNS and related concepts, followed by
a review of related work. We then detail our methodology and
present our results, focusing on direct dependency analysis,
indirect dependency analysis, and geographic analysis. The
discussion section interprets these results in the context of
the digital divide, geographical dependencies, and security
implications, including an analysis of attacker models. We
conclude with a summary of our findings and their significance
for DNS provisioning in Australia.
II. BACKGROUND
We provide background for our study of DNS dependencies
and their impact on Australian government domains, particularly those serving indigenous communities.
A. DNS and Its Hierarchy
DNS [13], [14] is a fundamental Internet component responsible (among other things) for translating human-readable
domain names into machine-readable IP addresses. Dependencies expressed in the DNS are critical for the availability
of Internet services. The DNS hierarchy begins with root
servers [15], followed by Top-Level Domains (TLDs), which
include generic TLDs (gTLDs) like .com and country-code
TLDs (ccTLDs) such as .au for Australia. Below these are
second-level domains. The various parts of a Fully Qualified
Domain Name (FQDN) are given as the concatenation of socalled labels at the various levels of this hierarchy. Fig. 1
shows an example. The DNS resolution process, illustrated
in Fig. 2, involves multiple steps. In the simplest case, and
without caching, this includes: 1) A recursive DNS server
initiates the query. 2) It queries a root server, which then
directs it to the corresponding TLD server. 3) The TLD server
directs the query to the authoritative name server (NS) for the
specific queried domain. 4) The authoritative server retrieves
the IP address, which is subsequently sent back to the recursive
server. User interaction happens via a stub DNS resolver that
directs its queries to the recursive server, which is usually
provided by an ISP or operated as a public service (e.g., the
public resolver of Google).
B. DNS Dependencies
Service dependencies [16], [17] can be categorized into
direct and indirect forms as follows. Direct dependencies
occur when a service (e.g., a website) explicitly relies on other
services provided by a third-party company. For the DNS, an
example would be website X designating company Y as its
gleneira.vic.gov.au
a4-65.akam.net. a8-67.akam.net. a1-84.akam.net.
dns1.optus.net.au. dns0.optus.net.au.
Akamai Technologies
OptusTelecommunications
a11-67.akam.net. a5-67.akam.net. a6-67.akam.net. a18-67.akam.net. a1-67.akam.net. a28-67.akam.net. a13-67.akam.net.
a22-67.akam.net. a12-67.akam.net. a4-67.akam.net. a3-67.akam.net. a7-67.akam.net. a9-67.akam.net.
a14-67.akam.net. a3-64.akam.net. a5-66.akam.net.
Fig. 3: DNS Dependencies: lines represent name servers.
DNS provider, which results in Y operating the authoritative
name servers for X’s domain. Indirect dependencies arise
from a chain (or multiple chains) of direct dependencies. If
site X uses provider Y , which in turn depends on company Z,
then X indirectly depends on Z. As it is possible to have authoritative name servers with multiple companies, many such
chains can exist. Consequently, a service may be unknowingly
exposed to vulnerabilities in these chains. Fig. 3 illustrates
these dependencies using the example of gleneira.vic.gov.au.
Despite not directly using Akamai’s services, this domain
could be affected by Akamai outages due to its indirect
dependency through Optus [18].
C. Digital Divide and Indigenous Australians
The term digital divide refers to the gap between individuals or groups who have access to and can effectively
use digital services and those who lack such access [19]. It
affects economically disadvantaged and marginalized groups,
including the indigenous people of Australia [20]. Indigenous
Australians, comprising Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait
Islander peoples [21], often face challenges in accessing
quality Internet services due to their remote locations [22].
While this client-side problem is well known, the geographical
isolation can be exacerbated by inadequate DNS infrastructure
on the service side. This may potentially lead to a different
form of digital divide, which has so far received very little
attention. By examining the DNS infrastructure serving the
indigenous communities, we can identify potential disparities
in service quality, reliability, and security that may arise from
different dependency patterns or geographical distributions
of DNS servers. We note that the indigenous people of
Australia are also referred to as Indigenous Australians or
the First Nations people [21]. In this paper, we use the term
indigenous, which is also used by the United Nations [23].
III. RELATED WORK
Many studies have explored the digital divide such as [22],
[24], [25]. Wang et al. [24] examined the digital divide in
the context of energy poverty, revealing its negative effects on
Internet utility. In Australia, the digital divide has emerged due
to the significant remoteness and isolation of indigenous communities, which reduces the quality of Internet connectivity
and limits their access to digital services [22], [25].
The phenomenon of centralization on the Internet and the
concentration of infrastructure in the hands of a few dominant
service providers have been the subject of investigation in
previous studies. Zemburki et al. in [26] analyzed market share
3
and top DNS providers. The authors used active measurement
to examine this trend across different TLDs and geographical
locations by using datasets obtained from the OpenINTEL
[27] project. Their results revealed a growing concentration
of Internet infrastructure over time. In [28], Zembruzki et al.
conducted an analysis of DNS consolidation by evaluating authoritative name server configurations across multiple ccTLDs
and gTLDs which utilized five years from the OpenINTEL
project. According to their findings, the top 5 DNS providers
handle 20% of all analyzed domain names, while the top
100 providers manage 80% of domains with resolvable IPv4
addresses. The authors of [29] analyzed the DNS traffic from
the B-Root DNS root server and two ccTLDs, namely New
Zealand’s .nz and the Netherlands’ .nl. They measured the
level of centralization resulting from the dominant cloud
providers, including Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Cloudflare,
and Facebook. Their study revealed that over one-third of
queries made to both ccTLDs are the IP addresses of these
providers.
The authors of [16], [29] also studied the concept of
dependencies and their impact on the Internet ecosystem. In
[16], the authors analyzed direct dependencies by focusing
on the Mirai Dyn attack and its impact on the top 100k
Alexa websites [30] that relied on the Dyn DNS server as
their DNS provider. Their findings revealed that about 90%
of the top 100K websites listed by Alexa depend on third
parties. Among these websites, 50% to 70% are prone to
service outages if prominent DNS providers (Cloudflare, AWS
DNS, and DNSMadeEasy) fail. In [31], [32], and [33], the
authors developed a graph-based model to investigate the
phenomenon of dependencies within the DNS context. Their
findings demonstrated that over 50% of domain name resolution processes rely on third-party authoritative name servers.
Xu et al. in [34] developed a graph model to illustrate the
dependency relationship between domains and servers in the
name resolution process. Additionally, they introduced a tool
to determine the smallest set of name servers whose failure
could disrupt resolution for each domain. Our study follows
a similar approach, but due to the much smaller sample size,
we do not build a dedicated graph model.
Furthermore, studies such as [35] and [36] have investigated
the impact of third-party dependencies on services including
DNS, CDNs (Content Delivery Networks), and CAs (Certificate Authority). Kashaf et al. in [35] focused on Africancentric websites. They used a combination of web crawling, data analysis, and visualization techniques. Their results
indicated that African websites are significantly affected by
third-party dependencies, with a significant concentration in
reliance on third-party service providers. The authors of [36]
investigated website dependencies more precisely. Similar to
[17], this work developed the concept of a chain of dependencies called TPTs (Third Party Trees) to reveal the
hierarchical dependencies between each website and its thirdparty service providers. Moura et al., in their study [37],
identified a vulnerability called TsuNAME in the DNS system.
This vulnerability leads to loops in the resolution process and
creates cyclic dependencies that generate a high frequency
of queries. The authors demonstrated how such query flooding significantly increases traffic forwarding to authoritative
servers—this escalation in traffic results in potential denial
of service to DNS services. By studying real-world events
within New Zealand’s .nz ccTLD, the authors found that the
misconfiguration of just two domains leads to a 50% surge in
overall traffic.
In contrast to these works, our paper aims to investigate
the implications of DNS dependencies on indigenous populations in Australia, with a particular focus on the cascading
effects that arise from relying on DNS hosting providers.
Our analysis is centered around services delivered to people
through government websites. To the best of our knowledge,
this research is the first of its kind to explore the impact of
DNS dependencies through the lens of services to vulnerable
indigenous communities in Australia.
IV. METHODOLOGY
We present the methodology employed in our paper to
investigate the impact of DNS dependencies on websites
serving the indigenous people of Australia. Our methodology
consists of four main phases: Australian government service
identification, data Collection, retrieving authoritative name
servers, and constructing DNS dependency graphs.
A. Service Category Exploration
The initial phase involves desk research on online resources
(such as government web pages, news websites, and blog
posts) to identify the scope of services the Australian government offers to both general and indigenous populations. Our
exploration begins with Services Australia [38] portal, a foundational government resource that includes information about
a considerable range of services accessible to Australians. Despite the information provided by Services Australia and other
government resources, to the best of our knowledge, there
is no single, comprehensive, and categorized list of services
that could be directly utilized for our research. Therefore, we
conducted desk research to identify the broad categories of
government services relevant to our study. This preliminary
exploration lays the groundwork for the subsequent data collection phase. We identified 16 main categories of government
services. These categories and their corresponding keywords
are presented in Table I. Each category is extracted by initial
analysis of the web page’s content to identify the most relevant
and frequently occurring terms and phrases that best describe
the services within each category. These categories include
a wide range of essential services. For instance, Australia’s
healthcare system operates as a complex network involving
public and private sector organizations that work together to
provide health services to all Australians [39]. In parallel to
healthcare, the Australian government offers support services
for individuals with disabilities, ranging from specialized
medical care to providing assistive technology and financial
assistance to enhance the quality of life and ensure inclusion
in society [40]. These selected categories serve as the primary
keywords for our data collection process to identify the specific
government domains that deliver essential services to the
general and indigenous populations in Australia. By focusing
4
TABLE I: Keywords sorted based on the identified 16 categories of government services.
Healthcare Disability Support Family Support Business Support
Preventive care Rehabilitation services Child support Business training
Chronic conditions Assistive technology Residential care Business mentoring
Specialist care Improve accessibility Childcare Entrepreneurship
Telehealth services Promote social inclusion Youth support Procurement policies
Vaccination Community program Adolescent support Provide funding
Medical services Violence prevention
Education Housing Community Development Environmental Programs
Training programs Homelessness support Individual support Land management
School programs Affordable housing Cultural maintenance Protect sacred sites
Vocational training Appropriate housing Social connection Traditional lands
Adult education Home-ownership Natural resources
Preserve cultural heritage
Disaster Relief Economic Development Women Support Legal Services
Emergency services Employment services Women health Legal aid
Rebuilding homes Job training Accommodation service Resolving disputes
Infrastructure improvement Job seeking Support groups Justice
Temporary accommodation Financial assistance Employment opportunities Family law
Distribution of food Financial stability Domestic violence Criminal law
Retirement Support Cultural Preservation Mental Health Addiction Support
Age pension Language program Well-being Substance abuse
Superannuation savings Traditional arts and crafts Counselling services Treatment service
on these services and finding the relevant government domains,
particularly in relation to the indigenous population, we understand how DNS dependencies and geographic distribution of
servers might affect access to essential government services.
B. Domain Collection
In this section, we outline the domain collection process,
specifically targeting Australian government websites that
provide a range of services to the general and indigenous
population. The types of services identified in section IV-A
serve as the primary keywords for this process. By utilizing
these principal keywords, we identify the actual government
services and their corresponding domains. There are no openaccess data sets of Australian domains categorized based on
the target population group that we could have used directly
for our study. Hence, we employ a web crawling technique to
identify them. We follow these steps to collect governmental
domains for the general and indigenous people of Australia:
1) Web search: Utilizing Google search, we fetch pertinent
governmental websites using keywords associated with the
16 service categories identified in the previous step. These
keywords, derived from the service category exploration phase,
serve as search queries to identify government websites offering services in these specific areas. Our search is restricted to
websites with the .gov.au suffix, guaranteeing the inclusion of
only authorized Australian government websites.
2) URL extraction: We identify the first 100 URLs obtained
from Google search results and add them to the URL dataset.
3) Keyword extraction: This step involves crawling the URLs
of the visited web pages and using a word cloud technique to
extract the top five most common and contextually relevant
words from each web page. A manual check is then conducted to verify relevancy. These extracted keywords are crosschecked against the existing ones in the set, and those that are
new and relevant are added to the set for further searches.
4) Domain extraction: we parse the web page URLs and
extract the corresponding domains, which are then collected
and stored in a dedicated data set.
5) Iteration: We iterate until no additional keywords or domains are identified.
To create two unique sets of domains for the indigenous and
general populations, we conduct the process from step 1 to step
5 in two rounds. In the first round, we include keywords related
to indigenous terms, such as Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander, to collect domains dedicated to indigenous services.
In the second round, we exclude these terms to collect domains
targeting the general public. After capturing these domains, we
manually validate that they accurately match the respective
target group. This process ensures the creation of two distinct
and relevant domain sets. Data collected through this paper
is accessible via IEEE DataPort [41]. Fig. 4 illustrates the
flowchart that outlines the steps to identify and categorize
Australian government domains, focusing on services for the
general population and indigenous communities.
C. Retrieval of Authoritative Name Servers
This section involves obtaining the authoritative name
servers for the domains we collected. We develop a custom
script based on command-line tools to obtain the DNS records,
specifically focusing on NS records that indicate the authoritative DNS servers for each domain. We send queries to all 13
root servers [42] as of the 22nd of February 2023 [15], [43].
Once we have obtained the name servers for the domains,
our next objective in this stage is to establish two chains of
dependencies—one for indigenous domains and another for
general domains. This involves querying the name servers to
acquire subsequent name servers, continuing this process until
we reach the final authoritative name servers in the chain. This
approach gives us a high chance of capturing the majority of
the available NS records. Additionally, we leverage WHOIS
to collect information about the provider company associated
with each captured name server. The results obtained from this
stage are utilized to visualize the DNS dependency graph in
the next stage.
5
Start
Identify Government Services:
Conduct desk research on
Australian webpages to identify
primary list of government services.
Any New
Keywords?
Any New
Domains?
Thenumber of 448 and 54
domains arestored in DomainsSet
for general and Indigenous
population, respectively.
Stop
Web Search:
Search Googleby New Keywords, using .gov.au suffix to identify
government URLs. Download top 100 results.
URLsSet
KeywordsExtraction:
Extract top 5 most
prevalent keywords
using word clouding.
Domain Extraction:
Extract domains from URLs. Temporary
DomainsList
Domain NamesValidation:
Check to ensureeach
domain alignswith the
correct population group
in DomainsSet.
KeywordsVerification:
Select thecontextual
relevant keywords.
KeywordsSet
Update
DomainsVerification:
Check therelevency
of domains.
Incorporate
Indigenous-specific terms
to New Keywords.
Identified total of
16 servicecategories.
Yes
Yes
DomainsSet
Update
CategorizeGovernment Services:
Group related services together to
form distinct categories.
Assign identified 16 service
categoriesasPrimary Keywords.
No
No
AND
M anual operation
Document
Process
Database
Preparation
Decision
Display
Legend
Fig. 4: Flowchart for identifying and categorizing Australian government domains by general and indigenous population.
D. Dependency Graph Construction
We construct two dependency graphs that illustrate the chain
of dependencies between the DNS providers and the Australian government domains for both the general population
and indigenous people. The are two types of relationships
between domains and their name servers: direct and indirect dependencies. Direct dependency refers to a domain’s
immediate reliance on the name servers that are explicitly
designated in its DNS configuration without considering any
further dependencies of those name servers themselves. An
indirect dependency, on the other hand, arises when the name
servers directly associated with a domain further rely on other
name servers or DNS providers for their own resolution.
This creates a chain of dependencies involving intermediate
providers. This process results in a chain of dependencies
from the domain/subdomain to the final authoritative name
servers as well as the governmental websites and the final
DNS providers, respectively. Fig. 3 illustrates an example of
how nodes are connected in the dependency graph. Optus
is the DNS provider of gleneria.vic.gov.au. Optus itself depends on Akamai as one of the hyperscaler-type providers.
By visualizing the DNS dependency graph, we gain a clear
and comprehensive understanding of how these entities are
interconnected, allowing us to expose the impact of DNS
dependencies on the indigenous and general domains.
V. RESULTS
We present our findings on DNS dependencies and their
geographical distribution for Australian government domains
serving the general population and indigenous communities.
A. Direct Dependency Analysis
We examine the immediate relationships between Australian
government domains and their primary DNS providers. We
analyze the distribution of these dependencies across different types of providers, including leading global companies,
local Australian providers, and government-hosted services.
Our findings reveal potential disparities in DNS provisioning
between domains serving the general population and those
targeted at indigenous communities. In Fig. 5, the dependency relationships between domains and DNS providers are
illustrated, with providers classified as leading, non-leading,
and governmental types. Leading DNS providers refer to
the dominant and well-established companies in the industry,
often associated with tech giants or hyperscalers. Examples
of leading DNS providers mentioned in this paper include
AWS Route 53, Microsoft Azure DNS, Cloudflare DNS,
Google Cloud DNS, and Akamai Edge DNS. These providers
have a significant market share and are known for their
extensive infrastructure and global presence. Non-leading DNS
providers, on the other hand, refer to smaller or lesser-known
companies that offer DNS services. These providers may have
a more limited market share compared to the leading providers
and may operate on a regional or national scale. Examples
of non-leading DNS providers in the Australian context are
Telstra [44], Optus [18], and Webcentral [45]. Governmental
DNS providers, in this paper, are those that are operated and
managed by the Australian government sector. In this paper,
these providers are specific to the government sectors that are
used to host DNS services for some government websites and
domains.
Table II provides a summary of dependencies on thirdparty DNS providers for both general and indigenous domains. The data is divided into two categories: general and
6
indigenous populations, encompassing a total of 448 and 54
domains, respectively. The analysis encloses various aspects of
dependency, including the reliance on leading providers, nonleading providers (both domestic and international), as well
as governmental providers. The analysis also examines two
key aspects of DNS provider dependency: critical dependency
and diversified dependency. Critical dependency refers to a
domain’s reliance on a single DNS provider for its name
resolution services. When a domain critically depends on a
single provider, it becomes vulnerable to any disruptions,
outages, or security issues affecting that provider. In contrast, diversified dependency refers to a domain’s reliance
on multiple DNS providers, i.e., a site distributes its DNS
infrastructure across different providers. This can enhance
its resilience and availability, as a site is less likely to be
impacted by issues affecting a single provider. It also allows
for redundancy and fail-over mechanisms. Our results reveal
a considerable amount of critical dependencies where just one
DNS provider is used, with 92% and 100% for the general
and indigenous domains, respectively. Specifically, 48.9% of
general domains and 53.7% of indigenous domains rely on
leading providers. Conversely, non-leading providers account
for 31.3% of dependency in the general population and 46.3%
in the indigenous populations. Moreover, the percentage of
dependency on non-leading Australia-headquartered providers
is almost doubled for indigenous people compared to the general domains. The dependency on non-leading non-Australian
providers is relatively low for both groups at 8.5% and 3.7%
for the general and the indigenous populations, respectively.
Furthermore, the results reveal that 25.2% of domains in
the general population are dependent on intra-government
providers, something we do not find for the indigenous group.
Additionally, a critical dependency on non-leading Australian
providers is observed in 20.8% of general domains and 42.6%
of indigenous domains. These findings demonstrate a significant prevalence of critical dependencies on DNS providers
in Australia, particularly within the indigenous population,
where 100% of domains are critically dependent on a single
provider. For 2% of the general domains, we were unable to
identify the exact companies that act as DNS providers from
the information in the DNS records or from the WHOIS (as
information there was redacted). Around 50% of the domains
serving both general and indigenous populations depend on
leading DNS providers. This indicates that few providers
handle a large portion of DNS services which could lead to
potential risks of service outages during large-scale attacks. On
the other hand, the other half of the indigenous services and
31.3% of general services rely on non-leading DNS providers.
Fig. 6 and Table III specifically focus on the utilization of
leading DNS providers by Australian governmental websites
and show the percentages of domains that depend on specific
leading providers. For instance, 21.4% of general domains rely
on Amazon DNS services, while only 7.4% of indigenous
domains do the same. The analysis also reveals the usage
of other leading DNS providers, such as Microsoft, Cloudflare, Akamai, UltraDNS, Google, DNSimple, and EasyDNS,
with varying proportions across the two population groups.
That is, 31.5% of indigenous websites use Microsoft DNS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Leading Non-Leading Governmental Not-disclosed
Domains/subdomains (%)
General Population
Indigenous Population
Fig. 5: Dependency on various DNS provider types: general
vs. indigenous domains.
TABLE II: Direct and indirect dependencies on third-party
DNS providers. Percentages reflect the proportion of the total
number of domains that depend on the given provider type
and do not sum to 100% due to overlapping dependencies.
General(448) Indigenous(54)
Provider Type Direct Indirect Direct
Leading 219(48.9%) 18(4%) 29(53.7%)
Non-Leading 140(31.3%) 12(2.7%) 25(46.3%)
Non-Leading (domestic) 105(23.4%) 10(2.2%) 23(42.6%)
Non-Leading (int’l.) 38(8.5%) 4(0.9%) 2(3.7%)
Intra-Governmental 113(25.2%) N/A N/A
Not-disclosed 8(1.8%) 3(0.7%) N/A
Critical Dependency Direct Indirect Direct
Any provider type 412(92%) 26(5.8%) 54(100%)
Leading 202(45.1%) 17(3.8%) 29(53.7%)
Non-Leading 122(27.2%) 9(2%) 25(46.3%)
Non-Lead (domestic) 93(20.8%) 7(1.6%) 23(42.6%)
Non-Leading (int’l.) 29(6.5%) 2(0.4%) 2(3.7%)
Diverse Dependency Direct Indirect Direct
Any provider type 36(8%) 3(0.7%) N/A
Multiple Leading 8(1.8%) N/A N/A
Multiple Non-Leading 2(0.4%) 2(0.4%) N/A
Multiple Gov sections 6(1.3%) N/A N/A
Intra-Gov & Leading 1(0.2%) N/A N/A
Intra-Gov & Non-Leading 18(4%) N/A N/A
providers. For general domains, this is around 17%. The rate
of dependency on Cloudflare DNS providers for the indigenous population is 83% more than the share of the general
population. In contrast, the general population uses Akamai,
UltraDNS (Neustar), Google, and DNSimple providers in less
than 5% of DNS services. However, indigenous websites do
not use them. EasyDNS is only used by the indigenousfocused domains (5%). The final row of the table indicates
a relatively small number of general domains that depend
on two DNS providers, namely Amazon and Microsoft. This
configuration is not observed for the indigenous group.
Similarly, the dependency on non-leading DNS providers
utilized in Australia is shown in Fig. 7. Approximately 24%
of general domains rely on local DNS providers, whereas this
proportion increases to over 40% for indigenous domains. In
contrast, indigenous websites mainly depend on less than 5%
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
AmazonMicrosoft Cloudflare AkamaiUltraDNSGoogle DNSimple EasyDNS
Domains/subdomains (%)
General Population
Indigenous Population
Fig. 6: Dependency on leading DNS providers: general vs.
indigenous domains.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Domestic International
Domains/subdomains (%)
General Population
Indigenous Population
Fig. 7: Dependency on non-leading DNS providers: general
vs. indigenous domains.
of non-leading international DNS providers. This is close to
9% for the general population.
Fig. 8 and Table V focus on the most frequently used domestic DNS providers. These results indicate that a significant
proportion of both the general and indigenous populations
depend on non-leading DNS providers. Telstra emerges as
the most commonly used DNS provider for both populations,
followed by Macquarie Telecom and CITEC. Telstra, Australia’s largest telecommunications company (by market share
[46]), has slightly less than 8% of the share from both general
and indigenous domains. The share of Macquarie Telecom
is less than 4% for the general population domains, and it
is used by 6% of indigenous websites. CITEC (Centre for
Information Technology and Communication [47] [48]), the
Queensland Government’s primary ICT services provider, has
only a 4% share of general domains. This number is only 2%
for the indigenous population. Webcentral has an equal share
of less than 2% from both general and indigenous domains.
4% of indigenous DNS services are dependent on less-known
Australian DNS providers such as OPC IT and ThreeAMWeb.
General domains use Optus (which is a large subsidiary of
a Singaporean telecommunications company). A significant
outage of the Optus network occurred on 8 November 2023,
affecting numerous customers and services across Australia
[49]. This incident shows the potential risks associated with
relying on a single non-leading DNS provider. No indigenous
TABLE III: Leading DNS providers for the indigenous and
general population domains
Number of domains General Indigenous
Total 219(48.9%) 29(53.7%)
Dependent on Amazon 11(21.4%) 4(7.4%)
Dependent on Microsoft 79(17.6%) 17(31.5)%)
Dependent on Cloudflare 27(6%) 6(11.1%)
Dependent on Akamai 11(2.5%) 0
Dependent on UltraDNS 4(0.9%) 0
Dependent on Google 1(0.2%) 0
Dependent on DNSimple 1(0.2%) 0
Dependent on EasyDNS 0 2(3.7%)
Dependent on both Amazon and Microsoft 6(1.3%) 0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Telstra MacquarieCITEC Optus Webcentral OPC-IT 3AMweb
Domains/subdomains (%)
General Population
Indigenous Population
Fig. 8: Dependency on most commonly used domestic DNS
providers: general vs. indigenous populations.
domains were found to depend on non-Australian companies,
while 14 general domains rely on the US-based company
Verizon. These results show that there is a diverse range of
DNS providers used by both populations, with some reliance
on domestic providers and a limited reliance on non-Australian
companies, and indigenous domains expose a higher reliance
on non-leading providers.
In Fig. 9, we illustrate how domains are distributed among
the general population with multiple providers. Notably, none
of the indigenous domains are dependent on multiple DNS
providers. As shown in this figure, 20% of domains have
two distinct leading DNS providers (Amazon and Microsoft),
and less than 5% have two different non-leading providers.
Additionally, less than 20% of domains have intra-government
DNS providers that point to different government sectors. Over
half of general domains use both a government-hosted provider
and a third-party DNS provider.
B. Indirect Dependencies
Indirect dependencies represent a more complex web of
relationships in DNS provisioning. We investigate these to
disclose hidden vulnerabilities and centralization patterns that
may not be evident from direct dependencies alone. We
explore how indirect dependencies occur in general domains
(Table IV), focusing on the relationship between a domain’s
immediate DNS provider type (namely, leading and nonleading provider, with either Australian headquarters or nonAustralian headquarters) and its reliance on the indirect DNS
8
TABLE IV: Direct/indirect dependencies, general domains.
ule No. of domains Direct Indirect
5 Not-disclosed Leading
1 Intra-gov Leading
11 Intra-gov Non-leading (domestic&international)
11 Intra-gov Non-leading (domestic)
2 Intra-gov Non-leading (international)
12 Non-leading Leading
2 Non-leading Non-leading (international)
TABLE V: Non-leading DNS providers.
Number of domains General Indigenous
Total 142(31.7%) 25(46.3%)
Dependent on Telstra 34(7.6%) 4(7.4%)
Dependent on Macquarie Telecom 17(3.8%) 3(5.6%)
Dependent on CITEC 15(3.3%) 1(1.6%)
Dependent on Verizon 14(3.1%) 0
Dependent on Optus 9(2%) 0
Dependent on Webcentral 7(1.6%) 11(1.9%)
Dependent on NEC 7(1.6%) 0
Dependent on OPC IT 0 2(3.7%)
Dependent on Three AM Web 0 2(3.7%)
provider type, and discuss the implications for service reliability and security. In our observation, there is no evidence
of indirect dependencies for government domains dedicated to
indigenous people. Our examination reveals a dependence on
major companies such as Amazon and Akamai. Interestingly,
one domain employing government-hosted DNS services also
has an indirect dependency on Amazon. While certain domains
directly depend on intra-government services, their indirect
dependencies often lie with non-leading, both domestic and
international, providers such as Telstra, Optus, and CITEC.
This diversity in indirect providers could offer redundancy
and reduce single points of failure while also introducing
complexity and potential exposure to vulnerabilities. A significant observation is the indirect dependency of 12 domains
on leading providers despite their direct reliance on nonleading ones. This pattern underscores the pervasive influence of hyperscalers such as Amazon and Akamai in the
DNS infrastructure. The contrast between direct and indirect
dependencies reveals a critical aspect of DNS infrastructure
management. For general population domains, this leads to
centralization around a few hyperscaler entities.
C. Geographical Distribution of DNS Servers
The physical location of DNS servers plays a crucial role in
the performance and resilience of online services. By examining the geographical distribution of IP addresses associated
with DNS servers, especially those serving specific domains
such as Australian government domains dedicated to indigenous peoples, we can disclose patterns of reliance on thirdparty providers. We map the geographical distribution of DNS
servers associated with Australian government domains and
analyze how server locations differ for domains serving the
general population versus those focused on indigenous communities. For this, we leveraged the IP2Location database.
In addition to the geographical location, IP2Location also
provides information about the usage type of IP addresses.
The usage types relevant to our analysis are as follows: 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Lead&Lead NonLead&NonLead Intra-gov Gov&Third-party
Domains/subdomains (%)
Fig. 9: Diversified dependencies in general domains.
1) ISP (Internet Service Provider): IP addresses associated
with Internet service providers 2) DCH (Data Center/Web
Hosting/Transit): IP addresses belonging to data centers, web
hosting companies, or transit providers (the latter category is
less likely to contain authoritative name servers) 3) CDN (Content Delivery Network) 4) GOV (Government): IP addresses
assigned to government entities, implying that the DNS server
is operated by a government organization.
A problem that is common to geolocation databases is that
IP addresses, especially of hyperscalers, may be attributed to
the wrong country, in addition to IP allocations also everchanging (which may change the usage type). Given our small
sample size, our results must be taken with a grain of salt.
For example, the geographical distribution of the DNS servers
associated with Australian government domains for indigenous
peoples spans across five countries: Australia, Canada, Hong
Kong, Japan, and the United States. The Australian setting is
much more plausible than that of Hong Kong or Japan, which
may be such cases of wrong attributions. However, it would
still imply the use of powerful providers and hyperscalers.
In Australia, the presence of ISP/DCH usage types indicates
a mix of local Internet service provisioning and data center
hosting. The United States is also a plausible hosting location:
it hosts the highest number of DNS servers, indicating a
heavy reliance on US-based infrastructure. However, it is still
possible that these servers are physically located in Australia.
An international dependency may well be more vulnerable,
both from a technical and operational point of view.
Both domain groups have DNS servers primarily located in
Australia and the United States, as shown in Fig. 10, 11, 12,
and 13. The breakdown into usage types in Fig. 11 indicates
an overall diversified approach to DNS service provisioning
for the general domains. The presence of ISPs suggests
localized service delivery, while CDNs (Content Delivery Networks) highlight efforts to optimize content distribution and
performance. A small proportion is classified under “Gov”,
indicating government-managed servers, which may signify an
intention for self-reliance and control over DNS infrastructure.
This hints at a balance between globalized service provision
and localized service delivery and at strategic approaches to
deployment and performance optimization. The presence of
government-managed servers is also noteworthy, especially as
they are not present in the indigenous-focused infrastructure.
The DNS infrastructure for the general population seems to
have a greater emphasis on diversity and global distribution
9
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Australia Japan Hong Kong U.S. Other
Number of IPs
Fig. 10: Geographical location of general domains’ NS.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Australia Japan Honk Kong U.S. Other
Number of IPs
ISP
DCH
CDN
Gov
Fig. 11: Usage type for general domains’ NS.
compared to that of the indigenous peoples. The inclusion
of government servers for the general population suggests an
element of direct governmental control or self-reliance. For
the indigenous-focused domains, the emphasis appears to be
on a mix of local and international service provisioning with
a significant dependency on DCH and CDN providers.
VI. DISCUSSION
Our analysis of DNS dependencies for Australian government domains reveals implications for the digital divide,
geographic dependencies, and security vulnerabilities. We discuss these findings in the context of our three main research
questions.
A. Digital Divide
Our results provide evidence of a digital divide in DNS
provisioning between general and indigenous domains. The
main difference is the critical dependency on single providers:
100% of indigenous domains rely on a single DNS provider,
compared to 92% of general domains. This higher dependency
makes indigenous domains more vulnerable to service disruptions and potential attacks. Furthermore, indigenous domains
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Australia Canada Hong Kong Japan U.S.
Number of IPs
Fig. 12: Geographical location of indigenous domains’ NS.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Australia Canada Hong Kong Japan U.S.
Number of IPs
ISP
DCH
CDN
Fig. 13: Usage type for indigenous domains’ NS.
show a greater reliance on non-leading DNS providers (46.3%)
compared to general domains (31.3%). While this might reflect
a preference for local services, it also exposes these domains
to potential reliability issues, especially given that some of
these providers may have limited resources for security and
maintenance. Surprisingly, none of the indigenous domains
utilize government-operated DNS infrastructure. This absence
requires further investigation to understand its causes and
implications for security and reliability.
B. Geographic Dependencies
The geographical distribution of DNS servers reveals another aspect of DNS provisioning, although we caution that
geolocation information can be misleading, and hence our
results must be viewed in that light. Nevertheless, some
trends are evident. General population domains benefit from a
broader global spread. In contrast, indigenous domains show a
higher concentration of servers in fewer locations. The limited
geographic diversity for indigenous domains could lead to
increasing vulnerability to regional outages, imposing potential latency issues for users in different regions and greater
10
exposure to geographically targeted attacks. The preference for
domestic DNS providers by over 40% of indigenous domains,
while potentially driven by a desire for geographically closer
services, may increase the vulnerability to region-specific
disruptions or attacks.
C. Security Analysis
For our analysis of how various forms of dependencies lead
to a site being more or less vulnerable, we define three different attacker models. We categorize potential attackers into
three representative groups of varying strengths: lone wolves
(including individual attackers) [50], [51], the organized fringe
attackers (such as hacktivists) [52]–[55], and global actors
(e.g., nation states) [56], [57]. Each group has different resources, intentions, and targets, ranging from limited-resource
attackers targeting specific populations to well-funded, expert
attackers operating on a global scale.
We call our first attacker “lone wolf—weak but targeted”.
This attacker does not have many resources (hardware, network access, deep technical knowledge, finances) at their disposal. However, they act out of a strong, personal motivation,
and they only target particular organizations. An example of
such strong motivation would be hate of a particular societal
minority (e.g., racist sentiments, resentment of the LGBTQ+
community, etc). Their likely target is organizations representing or aiding such minorities, and their tools are limited to
what limited financial means can afford—for example, paying
an underground service a small amount of money to stage a
limited DDoS attack. In the context of our results, this attacker
is more concerned with the indigenous domains. The lack of
DNS service diversity makes indigenous domains particularly
vulnerable. Even with limited resources, a lone wolf attacker
could potentially disrupt services by focusing on the single
provider used by a domain.
We call our second attacker “organized fringe—limited and
targeted”. This attacker is typically a group that can raise
some relevant resources (financial contributions by members,
donations) and gain access to relevant knowledge that can
be used in an attack (e.g., members with a deep technical
background). The motivation is broader than in the previous
attacker model and represents, for instance, political fringe
movements: anti-democratic forces that also target minority
groups or direct resentment at them in a bid to win more
support. The likely targets are the same as before as well
as various government services. This attacker can invest substantially more resources—a more powerful DDoS attack is a
possibility, as is a takeover of the IT services of some smaller
companies with less stringent security. This attacker type is
of concern for both domain groups, but still more so for the
indigenous domains. The concentration of indigenous domains
on Australian providers makes them particularly attractive
targets.
We call our third attacker a “global actor—resourceful and
impact-oriented”. This attacker has means at their disposal that
one would usually associate with organized crime or, at worst,
even rogue nation-states. They can make substantial investments into sustained attacks and have access to skilled hackers.
The motivation here may be much broader than before: the
attacker may be less interested in hurting smaller organizations
and more focused on causing widespread damage that has
economic ramifications and will draw attention from politics,
often at a global level. Damage to services aiding minorities
may be a welcome side effect, but the targets would more
commonly be large, professional enterprises that offer cloud
services—in the more extreme cases, even global hyperscalers,
such as the DDoS attack on Amzon’s DNS service in October
2019 [58]. While these sophisticated attackers pose a threat to
all domains, the lack of diversity and redundancy in indigenous
domain DNS infrastructure makes them particularly vulnerable
to widespread, high-impact attacks.
To mitigate these risks, we recommend the following: (1)
Implementing multi-provider setups for all domains, especially
indigenous ones. (2) Diversifying the geographic locations
of DNS servers. (3) Incorporating government-operated DNS
services as an additional layer of resilience. These measures
would enhance the security against at least the two less powerful forms of attackers and improve overall service reliability.
VII. SUMMARY
This paper investigated the impact of Internet centralization on DNS provisioning and its security implications,
particularly focusing on the indigenous and general populations in Australia. The study categorized DNS providers
into leading (hyper-scaler, US-headquartered companies), nonleading (smaller Australian-headquartered or non-Australian
companies), and Australian government-hosted providers and
constructed dependency graphs to demonstrate direct and
indirect dependencies of Australian government domains on
these providers.
Our main findings included as follows: (1) Digital Divide:
There is a significant difference in the DNS service providers
used for indigenous and general population domains, which
imposes potential disparities in service quality and reliability.
Indigenous domains revealed a higher dependency on nonleading DNS providers compared to general population domains, indicating a digital divide in DNS provisioning. (2)
Geographic Dependencies: The geographical distribution of
DNS servers revealed the concentration of servers in fewer locations for indigenous domains, which could lead to increased
vulnerability to regional outages and potential latency issues.
The DNS servers for general population domains benefit from
a broader global spread. (3) Security Problems: The study
demonstrated vulnerabilities of each domain group to different
attacker models. Indigenous domains are more vulnerable due
to their critical dependency on single providers and limited geographic diversity. The analysis categorized potential attackers
into lone wolves, organized fringe attackers, and global actors,
each posing different levels of threat to the DNS infrastructure.
The paper implied that addressing these disparities and
vulnerabilities requires implementing multi-provider setups,
diversifying geographic server locations, and incorporating
government-operated DNS services to enhance security and
service availability, which could be the future research effort
on DNS dependency.
11
REFERENCES
[1] J. Arkko, B. Trammell, M. Nottingham, C. Huitema, M. Thomson,
J. Tantsura, and N. ten Oever, “Considerations on internet consolidation
and the internet architecture,” internet draft, IETF, 2019.
[2] “Top 10 managed dns service providers in the
world today.” https://www.emergenresearch.com/blog/
top-10-managed-dns-service-providers-in-the-world-today. Accessed:
2024-01-12.
[3] Amazon Web Services, Inc., “Amazon route 53,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-
03-31.
[4] Microsoft Corporation, “Azure dns,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-03-31.
[5] Cloudflare, Inc., “Cloudflare dns,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-03-31.
[6] Google LLC, “Google cloud dns,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-03-31.
[7] Akamai Technologies, “Akamai edge dns,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-03-31.
[8] “Centralization, Decentralization, and Internet Standards.” RFC 9518,
Dec. 2023.
[9] CrowdStrike, “Remediation and guidance hub: Falcon content
update for Windows hosts.” https://www.crowdstrike.com/
falcon-content-update-remediation-and-guidance-hub/, 25 July 2024.
[10] Cloudflare, “Understanding how Facebook disappeared from the internet.” https://blog.cloudflare.com/october-2021-facebook-outage, 4 October 2021.
[11] N. Nazemi, O. Tavallaie, A. Y. Zomaya, and R. Holz, “DNS Dependencies as an Expression of the Digital Divide: the Example of Australia,” in
European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, pp. 496–509,
Springer, 2023.
[12] T. 2023, “The TAURIN 2023 Workshop on Responsible Internet.” https:
//taurin2023.responsible-internet.org/. Accessed: [Access Date].
[13] P. Mockapetris, “Domain names - concepts and facilities,” Request for
Comments 1034, Internet Engineering Task Force, 1987.
[14] P. Mockapetris, “Domain names - implementation and specification,”
Request for Comments 1035, Internet Engineering Task Force, 1987.
[15] I. A. N. Authority, “Root server information.” https://www.iana.org/
domains/root/servers, 2023. Accessed on Jan 12, 2024.
[16] A. Kashaf, V. Sekar, and Y. Agarwal, “Analyzing third party service
dependencies in modern web services: Have we learned from the
mirai-dyn incident?,” in Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement
Conference, pp. 634–647, 2020.
[17] M. Ikram, R. Masood, G. Tyson, M. A. Kaafar, N. Loizon, and R. Ensafi,
“The chain of implicit trust: An analysis of the web third-party resources
loading,” in The World Wide Web Conference, pp. 2851–2857, 2019.
[18] Optus, “Optus,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-04-08.
[19] J. Van Dijk, The digital divide. John Wiley & Sons, 2020.
[20] K. Samaras, “Indigenous australians and the ‘digital divide’,” International Journal of Libraries and Information Studies, vol. 55, no. 2-3,
pp. 84–95, 2005.
[21] Australian Public Service Commission, “First nations vocabulary: Using
culturally appropriate language and terminology,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-
03-31.
[22] G. Singleton, M. F. Rola-Rubzen, K. Muir, D. Muir, and M. McGregor,
“Youth empowerment and information and communication technologies:
A case study of a remote australian aboriginal community,” GeoJournal,
vol. 74, pp. 403–413, 2009.
[23] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
“United nations declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples.” https://social.desa.un.org/issues/indigenous-peoples/
united-nations-declaration-on-the-rights-of-indigenous-peoples, 2024.
Accessed: 2024-03-31.
[24] S. Wang, A. Cao, G. Wang, and Y. Xiao, “The impact of energy poverty
on the digital divide: The mediating effect of depression and internet
perception,” Technology in Society, vol. 68, p. 101884, 2022.
[25] C. Intahchomphoo, “Indigenous peoples, social media, and the digital
divide: A systematic literature review,” American Indian Culture and
Research Journal, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 85–111, 2018.
[26] L. Zembruzki, R. Sommese, L. Z. Granville, A. S. Jacobs, M. Jonker,
and G. C. Moura, “Hosting industry centralization and consolidation,”
in NOMS 2022-2022 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management
Symposium, pp. 1–9, IEEE, 2022.
[27] “Openintel.” https://openintel.nl, 2023. Accessed on May 29, 2023.
[28] L. Zembruzki, A. S. Jacobs, and L. Z. Granville, “On the consolidation
of the internet domain name system,” in GLOBECOM 2022-2022 IEEE
Global Communications Conference, pp. 2122–2127, IEEE, 2022.
[29] G. C. M. Moura, S. Castro, W. Hardaker, M. Wullink, and C. Hesselman,
“Clouding up the internet: how centralized is dns traffic becoming?,”
in Proceedings of the ACM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC
’20), (New York, NY, USA), pp. 42–49, Association for Computing
Machinery, 2020.
[30] “Alexa - top sites.” https://www.alexa.com, 2023. Accessed on May 30,
2023.
[31] C. Deccio, J. Sedayao, K. Kant, and P. Mohapatra, “Measuring availability in the domain name system,” in 2010 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM,
pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2010.
[32] C. Deccio, J. Sedayao, K. Kant, and P. Mohapatra, “Quantifying dns
namespace influence,” Computer Networks, vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 780–794,
2012.
[33] C. Deccio, C.-C. Chen, P. Mohapatra, J. Sedayao, and K. Kant, “Quality
of name resolution in the domain name system,” in 2009 17th IEEE
International Conference on Network Protocols, pp. 113–122, IEEE,
2009.
[34] H. Xu, Z. Zhang, J. Yan, and T. Chai, “Name dependency and domain
name resolution risk assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3413–3424, 2022.
[35] A. Kashaf, J. Dou, M. Belova, M. Apostolaki, Y. Agarwal, and V. Sekar,
“A first look at third-party service dependencies of web services in
africa,” in Passive and Active Measurement: 24th International Conference, PAM 2023, Virtual Event, March 21–23, 2023, Proceedings,
pp. 595–622, Springer, 2023.
[36] T. Urban, M. Degeling, T. Holz, and N. Pohlmann, “Beyond the front
page: Measuring third party dynamics in the field,” in Proceedings of
The Web Conference 2020, pp. 1275–1286, 2020.
[37] G. C. Moura, S. Castro, J. Heidemann, and W. Hardaker, “tsuname: exploiting misconfiguration and vulnerability to ddos dns,” in Proceedings
of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference, pp. 398–418, 2021.
[38] “Services australia.” https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au, 2023. Accessed on Jun 1, 2023.
[39] “Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW).” https://www.aihw.
gov.au/. Accessed: 2024-04-01.
[40] Department of Social Services, Australian Government, “Program services for people with disability,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-04-02.
[41] N. Nazemi, “Australian Government Domains for General and Indigenous Populations: NS Records and DNS Provider IPGeolocation,” 2024.
[42] “Root servers.” https://root-servers.org, 2023. Accessed on Jun 1, 2023.
[43] Internic, “Named root file.” https://www.internic.net/domain/named.root,
2023. Accessed on Feb 22, 2023.
[44] Telstra, “Broadband internet, nbn, 5g, tv & mobile phone services,”
2024. Accessed: 2024-06-12.
[45] Webcentral, “Australian domain names, hosting, website & emails,”
2024. Accessed: 2024-06-12.
[46] “Telstra group limited.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telstra, 2023. Accessed on March 26, 2023.
[47] “Queensland state archives.” https://www.archivessearch.qld.gov.au/
agencies/A482, 2023. Accessed on March 26, 2023.
[48] “Citec.” https://services.citec.com.au/about/, 2023. Accessed on March
26, 2023.
[49] Parliament of Australia, “Optus network outage,” 2024. Accessed: 2024-
06-12.
[50] G. C. Kessler, “Lone operator cyberterrorism from the perspective of
a hacker,” Lone Actors–An Emerging Security Threat, vol. 123, p. 45,
2015.
[51] G. C. Kessler, “Lone-operator cyberterrorism,” Journal of Information
Warfare, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 15–28, 2016.
[52] J. Jing, P. Liu, D. Feng, J. Xiang, N. Gao, and J. Lin, “Areca: a highly
attack resilient certification authority,” in Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
workshop on Survivable and self-regenerative systems: in association
with 10th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
pp. 53–63, 2003.
[53] R. Girtler, “The fringe group of hackers—rebels, spies and thieves,” e &
i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik, vol. 120, pp. 216–219, 2003.
[54] S. R. Davies, “Characterizing hacking: Mundane engagement in us
hacker and makerspaces,” Science, Technology, & Human Values,
vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 171–197, 2018.
[55] P. A. Taylor, “From hackers to hacktivists: speed bumps on the global
superhighway?,” New Media & Society, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 625–646, 2005.
[56] J. Sheldon, “State of the art: Attackers and targets in cyberspace,”
Journal of Military and Strategic Studies, vol. 14, no. 2, 2012.
[57] A. Pawlicka, M. Choras, and M. Pawlicki, “Cyberspace threats: not ´
only hackers and criminals. raising the awareness of selected unusual
cyberspace actors-cybersecurity researchers’ perspective,” in Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Availability, Reliability
and Security, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[58] C. Williams, “Bezos ddos’d: Amazon web services’ dns systems knackered by hours-long cyber-attack,” The Register, 2019.
12
Niousha Nazemi is currently a PhD student in the
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney,
Australia. Her main research interests include Internet centralization, DNS measurement, and security
of federated learning.
Omid Tavallaie is a Postdoctoral Researcher in
Computer Networking at the Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford. Prior to
joining the University of Oxford, he was a Research
Associate and Lecturer at the School of Computer
Science, The University of Sydney, and a member
of the Centre for Distributed and High-Performance
Computing (Australia). He holds a PhD in Computer
Science from the University of Sydney in 2021.
Anna Maria Mandalari works as Assistant Professor at University College London (UCL). She
is affiliated with the Electronic & Electrical Engineering Department. She is member of the Italian
Technical Secretariat of the Committee for strategies
on the use of AI. She is Honorary Research Fellow
at the Institute for Security Science and Technology
at Imperial College London and expert fellow of the
UK SPRITE+ Hub. She obtained her PhD within the
framework of the METRICS project, which is part
of the Marie Skłodowska-Curie action, intended for
excellent researchers, affiliated with the Carlos III University of Madrid. Her
research interests are Internet of Things (IoT), privacy, security, networking,
Internet measurement techniques, and AI. She studies privacy implications
and information exposure from IoT devices. She works on the problem of
modelling, designing, and evaluating adaptation strategies based on Internet
measurements techniques. In addition to her research, Anna gives invited
talks all around the world to promote research and create awareness on
security, privacy, and ethical AI. Most of her research experiences have also
significantly contributed to several EU-funded research projects and have had
a significant influence on media and policymaking.
Hamed Haddadi (Member, IEEE) is a Professor
in Human-Centred Systems at the Department of
Computing at Imperial College London. He is part
of Imperial-X (I-X) where he leads the Privacy and
Security Research Area. He also serves as a Security
Science Fellow of the Institute for Security Science
and Technology. In his industrial role, he is the Chief
Scientist at Brave. His research interests are in UserCentred Systems, IoT, Applied Machine Learning,
Privacy, and Human-Data Interaction.
Ralph Holz is a Full Professor at the University of
Munster in Germany, and co-appointed at the Uni- ¨
versity of Twente in the Netherlands. His research
interests revolve around empirical security analysis,
with a focus on Internet security.
Albert Y. Zomaya (Fellow, IEEE) is the Peter Nicol
Russell Chair Professor of Computer Science in the
School of Computer Science, Sydney University,
and the Director of the Centre for Distributed and
High-Performance Computing. Professor Zomaya
has published over 700 scientific papers and articles
and is the author, co-author, or editor of more than
30 books. He is a decorated scholar with numerous accolades, including Fellowships of the IEEE,
AAAS, and the IET. Also, he is a Fellow of the
Australian Academy of Science, a Fellow of the
Royal Society of New South Wales, a Foreign Member of Academia Europaea,
and a Member of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts. His research
interests include parallel and distributed computing, networking, and complex
systems.